
ellipsoid-fit
==============

Ellipsoid fitting in C++ using Eigen. Widely inspired by https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/24693-ellipsoid-fit



# Note

The radii of the fitted ellipsoid surface are arranged based on the smallest rotation angle of the ellipsoid axes, deviated from the defined reference frame, along its axis of rotation containing its approximate center. 

This arrangement also applies to the sequence of the eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors. Consequently, the transpose of the eigenvectors' matrix from `*evec_column_p`, generated by the function
```cpp
Parameters ellipsoid::fit(..., Eigen::Vector3d* eval_p, Eigen::Matrix3d* evec_column_p, ...);
```
can be used as a rotation matrix to rotate the fitted ellipsoid to the nearest non-rotated ellipsoid, in term of rotation angle.

<details>
  <summary>Mathematical Details</summary>

From the C++ function above, suppose `*eval_p` contains $[e_0\ e_1\ e_2]^T$, and let its diagonal matrix `eval_p->asDiagonal()` denoted as $E$. Meanwhile, let `evec_column_p->transpose()` be denoted as $R$. 

Consider the inputs be $d_{in}=[x_{in}\ y_{in}\ z_{in}]^T$, while the outputs produced from rotating the inputs be $d_{out}=[x_{out}\ y_{out}\ z_{out}]^T$. The relationship between these vectors is given by:
$$
e_0\ x_{out}^2+e_1\ y_{out}^2+e_2\ z_{out}^2 = d_{in}^T R^T E\ R\ d_{in}
$$
Hence, the rotation from $d_{in}$ to $d_{out}$ is performed using
$d_{out} = R\ d_{in}$ or  
```cpp
...
Eigen::Vector3d d_in; // Inputs
Eigen::Matrix3d R = evec_column_p->transpose();

// Perform the multiplication d_out = R * d_in
Eigen::Vector3d d_out = R * d_in;
...
```

Also, mapping from ellipsoid to the sphere can be done using
$d_{out} = \sqrt{E} R\ d_{in}$ or 

```cpp
...
Eigen::Vector3d d_in; // Inputs
Eigen::Matrix3d R = evec_column_p->transpose();
Eigen::Matrix3d sqrt_E = eval_p->cwiseSqrt().asDiagonal();

// Perform sphere mapping d_out = E^(0.5) * R * d_in
Eigen::Vector3d d_out = sqrt_E * R * d_in;
...
```
</details>

## Warning
If any of the radii results in a 'NaN' value, it indicates that the fitted surface is not an ellipsoid but a hyperboloid.

Package Overview
================

The **ellipsoid-fit** package contains the following:

 * Libraries:

   * ellipsoid-fit (shared)

 * Examples:

   * fitting-example

 * Tests:

   * test-ellipsoid-fit


Installation and Usage
======================

The **ellipsoid-fit** project is packaged using [PID](http://pid.lirmm.net), a build and deployment system based on CMake.

If you wish to adopt PID for your develoment please first follow the installation procedure [here](http://pid.lirmm.net/pid-framework/pages/install.html).

If you already are a PID user or wish to integrate **ellipsoid-fit** in your current build system, please read the appropriate section below.


## Using an existing PID workspace

This method is for developers who want to install and access **ellipsoid-fit** from their PID workspace.

You can use the `deploy` command to manually install **ellipsoid-fit** in the workspace:
```bash
cd <path to pid workspace>
pid deploy package=ellipsoid-fit # latest version
# OR
pid deploy package=ellipsoid-fit version=x.y.z # specific version
```
Alternatively you can simply declare a dependency to **ellipsoid-fit** in your package's `CMakeLists.txt` and let PID handle everything:
```cmake
PID_Dependency(ellipsoid-fit) # any version
# OR
PID_Dependency(ellipsoid-fit VERSION x.y.z) # any version compatible with x.y.z
```

If you need more control over your dependency declaration, please look at [PID_Dependency](https://pid.lirmm.net/pid-framework/assets/apidoc/html/pages/Package_API.html#pid-dependency) documentation.

Once the package dependency has been added, you can use `ellipsoid-fit/ellipsoid-fit` as a component dependency.

You can read [PID_Component](https://pid.lirmm.net/pid-framework/assets/apidoc/html/pages/Package_API.html#pid-component) and [PID_Component_Dependency](https://pid.lirmm.net/pid-framework/assets/apidoc/html/pages/Package_API.html#pid-component-dependency) documentations for more details.
## Standalone installation

This method allows to build the package without having to create a PID workspace manually. This method is UNIX only.

All you need to do is to first clone the package locally and then run the installation script:
 ```bash
git clone https://gite.lirmm.fr/rpc/math/ellipsoid-fit.git
cd ellipsoid-fit
./share/install/standalone_install.sh
```
The package as well as its dependencies will be deployed under `binaries/pid-workspace`.

You can pass `--help` to the script to list the available options.

### Using **ellipsoid-fit** in a CMake project
There are two ways to integrate **ellipsoid-fit** in CMake project: the external API or a system install.

The first one doesn't require the installation of files outside of the package itself and so is well suited when used as a Git submodule for example.
Please read [this page](https://pid.lirmm.net/pid-framework/pages/external_API_tutorial.html#using-cmake) for more information.

The second option is more traditional as it installs the package and its dependencies in a given system folder which can then be retrived using `find_package(ellipsoid-fit)`.
You can pass the `--install <path>` option to the installation script to perform the installation and then follow [these steps](https://pid.lirmm.net/pid-framework/pages/external_API_tutorial.html#third-step--extra-system-configuration-required) to configure your environment, find PID packages and link with their components.
### Using **ellipsoid-fit** with pkg-config
You can pass `--pkg-config on` to the installation script to generate the necessary pkg-config files.
Upon completion, the script will tell you how to set the `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable for **ellipsoid-fit** to be discoverable.

Then, to get the necessary compilation flags run:

```bash
pkg-config --static --cflags ellipsoid-fit_ellipsoid-fit
```

```bash
pkg-config --variable=c_standard ellipsoid-fit_ellipsoid-fit
```

```bash
pkg-config --variable=cxx_standard ellipsoid-fit_ellipsoid-fit
```

To get linker flags run:

```bash
pkg-config --static --libs ellipsoid-fit_ellipsoid-fit
```




Offline API Documentation
=========================

With [Doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl) installed, the API documentation can be built locally by turning the `BUILD_API_DOC` CMake option `ON` and running the `doc` target, e.g
```bash
pid cd ellipsoid-fit
pid -DBUILD_API_DOC=ON doc
```
The resulting documentation can be accessed by opening `<path to ellipsoid-fit>/build/release/share/doc/html/index.html` in a web browser.

License
=======

The license that applies to the whole package content is **GNULGPL**. Please look at the [license.txt](./license.txt) file at the root of this repository for more details.

Authors
=======

**ellipsoid-fit** has been developed by the following authors: 
+ Benjamin Navarro (LIRMM)
+ CK-Explorer ()

Please contact Benjamin Navarro (navarro@lirmm.fr) - LIRMM for more information or questions.
